Update migration guide with the new `ruff.configuration` (#16567)
astral-sh/ruff: docs/editors/migration.md

# Migrating from `ruff-lsp`

> To provide some context, [`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] is the [Language Server Protocol] implementation for

Reviewer: I think we could make this slightly more concise by just giving the context, without the introductory clause:

```suggestion
[`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] is the [Language Server Protocol] implementation for
```

> Ruff to power the editor integrations which is written in Python and is a separate package from Ruff
> itself. The **native server** is the [Language Server Protocol] implementation which is **written in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ruff to power the editor integrations. It is written in Python and is a separate package from Ruff
itself. The **native server**, however, is the [Language Server Protocol] implementation which is **written in
```

Rust** and is available under the `ruff server` command. This guide is intended to help users
migrate from [`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] to the native server.

!!! note

    The native server was first introduced in Ruff version `0.3.5`. It was marked as [beta in
    version `0.4.5`](https://astral.sh/blog/ruff-v0.4.5) and officially [stabilized in version
    `0.5.3`](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/releases/tag/0.5.3). It is recommended to use the
    latest version of Ruff to ensure the best experience.

The migration process involves any or all of the following:

1. Migrate [deprecated settings](#unsupported-settings) to the [new settings](#new-settings)
1. [Remove settings](#removed-settings) that are no longer supported
1. Update the `ruff` version

> Use the [examples](#examples) below to help you migrate your settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Read on to learn about the no longer supported or new settings, or jump to the examples that enumerate common migrations.
```

## Unsupported Settings

The following [`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] settings are not supported by the native server:

- [`lint.run`](settings.md#lintrun): This setting is no longer relevant for the native language
    server, which runs on every keystroke by default.
- [`lint.args`](settings.md#lintargs), [`format.args`](settings.md#formatargs): These settings have
    been replaced by more granular settings in the native server like [`lint.select`](settings.md#select),
    [`format.preview`](settings.md#format_preview), etc. along with the ability to override any
    configuration using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration) setting.

The following settings are not accepted by the language server but are still used by the [VS Code extension].

> Refer to their respective documentation for more information on how it's being used by the extension:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to their respective documentation pages for more information on how each is used by the extension:
```

> Additionally, the following settings are not supported by the native server, they should be removed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, the following settings are not supported by the native server and should be removed:
```

- [`ignoreStandardLibrary`](settings.md#ignorestandardlibrary)
- [`showNotifications`](settings.md#shownotifications)

## New Settings

> The native server introduces several new settings that [`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] does not have. These
> are, as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The native server introduces several new settings that [`ruff-lsp`][ruff-lsp] does not have:
```

- [`lint.ignore`](settings.md#ignore)
- [`lint.preview`](settings.md#lint_preview)

## Examples

All of the examples mentioned below are only valid for the [VS Code extension]. For other editors,

> please refer to their respective documentation on the [settings](settings.md) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
please refer to their respective documentation sections in the [settings](settings.md) page.
```

### Configuration file

If you've been providing a configuration file as shown below:

```json
{
    "ruff.lint.args": "--config ~/.config/custom_ruff_config.toml",
    "ruff.format.args": "--config ~/.config/custom_ruff_config.toml"
}
```

You can migrate to the new server by using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration) setting
like below which will apply the configuration to both the linter and the formatter:

```json
{
    "ruff.configuration": "~/.config/custom_ruff_config.toml"
}
```

### `lint.args`

If you're providing the linter flags by using `ruff.lint.args` like so:

```json
{
    "ruff.lint.args": "--select=E,F --unfixable=F401 --unsafe-fixes"
}
```

You can migrate to the new server by using the [`lint.select`](settings.md#select) and
[`configuration`](settings.md#configuration) setting like so:

```json
{
    "ruff.lint.select": ["E", "F"],
    "ruff.configuration": {
        "unsafe-fixes": true,
        "lint": {
            "unfixable": ["F401"]
        }
    }
}
```

> Following options can be set directly in the editor settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following options can be set directly in the editor settings:
```

- [`lint.select`](settings.md#select)
- [`lint.extendSelect`](settings.md#extendselect)
- [`lint.ignore`](settings.md#ignore)
- [`lint.preview`](settings.md#lint_preview)

> While the rest of the options can be set using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining options can be set using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration)
```

setting.

### `format.args`

> If you're also providing the formatter flags by using `ruff.format.args` like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're also providing formatter flags by using `ruff.format.args` like so:
```

```json
{
    "ruff.format.args": "--line-length 80 --config='format.quote-style=double'"
}
```

You can migrate to the new server by using the [`lineLength`](settings.md#linelength) and
[`configuration`](settings.md#configuration) setting like so:

```json
{
    "ruff.lineLength": 80,
    "ruff.configuration": {
        "format": {
            "quote-style": "double"
        }
    }
}
```

> Following options can be set directly in the editor settings:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following options can be set directly in the editor settings:
```

- [`lineLength`](settings.md#linelength)
- [`format.preview`](settings.md#format_preview)

> While the rest of the options can be set using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining options can be set using the [`configuration`](settings.md#configuration)
```
